# DAE-Index-Reduction-for-EMT-Models

This repository contains the code and data needed to reproduce the results and figures in **F. Majeau, J.D. Lara, E. Corona, and B.-M. Hodge, "DAE Index Reduction for Electromagnetic Transient Models"**, submitted for review April 2026. 


## Overview
This repo builds EMT-dq models of varying sizes with two different implementations
- The **general index reduction** (GIR) approach which corresponds to the ModelingToolkit-based infrastructure (`mtk/`).
- The **custom index reduction** (CIR) approach which corresponds to the NREL-Sienna-based infrastructure (`sienna/`). 
- The eight systems are made from multiples of 9-bus systems (1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128) for a maximum of 1152 buses.

This repo includes the following experiments:
- **Validation**: Compares CIR and GIR simulation trajectories and eigenvalues to confirm they produce equivalent results.
- **Model Construction Performance**: Measures total allocated memory, maximum resident set size, and wall‑clock time during model build.
- **Time‑Integration Performance**: Measures wall-clock time for the time‑integration phase as a reference metric.

A note about scope:
- This repo is not a polished package or library.
- It is not actively maintained beyond reproduction purposes.
- Please contact the authors with any questions about usage or for access to the larger files.


## Quick summary
There are two main ways to interact with this repo:
1. (fast) Generate performance plots and validation metrics from existing binary data. This can be done on a laptop.
2. (slow) Re‑run all experiments to regenerate data and analysis. This requires large compute.

How this code relates to the Figures and Tables in the manuscript:
- All of performance data shown in Figures 7,8, and 9 is in `analysis/performance_files_build/` and `analysis/performance_files_solve/`. 
  - (fast) The plots can be regenerated from the data by running `analysis/plot_performance.jl`.
  - (slow) The data can be regenerated by running `analysis/measure_performance_build.jl` and `analysis/measure_performance_solve.jl`.
- The norm metric summary shown in Table II is `analysis/validation_files/validation_metrics.csv`. 
  - (fast) The csv can be regenerated by running `analysis/summarize_validation_metrics.jl`. 
  - (slow) The original norms cannot be recalculated with the data in this repo because the solution binary files were too large to commit at this time. The solution binary files can be regenerated by running `sienna/run_simulation_Sienna.jl` and `mtk/run_simulation_MTK.jl`. If the user regenerates the solutions, then the norms can be be recalculated with `analysis/calculate_difference_norms.jl`. 
- The trajectory plot in Figure 6 is `analysis/validation_files/validation_trajectory_samples_6Bus_2sg1inv.pdf`. 
  - (slow) The plot cannot be regenerated with the data available on this repo because the solution binary files were too large to commit at this time. The solution binary files can be regenerated by running `sienna/run_simulation_Sienna.jl` and `mtk/run_simulation_MTK.jl`. If the user regenerates the solutions, the plot can be regenerated with `analysis/plot_validation_example.jl`.


## Project Setup
This project uses the Julia package environment system. Dependencies are fully specified via:
- `Project.toml`
- `Manifest.toml`

To reproduce the exact software environment used in the experiments, follow these steps:

1. Install Julia `v1.11.6` 

2. Clone the repo.
    ```sh
    cd {your_projects_directory}
    git clone https://github.com/fmajeau/DAE-Index-Reduction-for-EMT-Models.git
    ```
3. Clone forked dependencies.

    This project depends on customized versions of packages that are not available on the standard Julia registry. Before instantiating the environment, clone those forks:
    ```sh
    git clone https://github.com/fmajeau/PowerSystems.jl.git
    git clone https://github.com/fmajeau/PowerSimulationsDynamics.jl.git
    ```
4. Register local forked packages.

    This code requires forked versions of Sienna packages. Navigate to the cloned repo and start the Julia REPL using the current directory as the active project environment (Project.toml, Manifest.toml).
    ```sh
    cd path/to/DAE-Index-Reduction-for-EMT-Models
    julia --project=.
    ```
    Open the Julia package manager and check that the command prompt indicates the correct environment (i.e. `(DAE-Index-Reduction-for-EMT-Models) pkg>`). Run the `develop` lines one at a time. This step ensures the local paths to the forked packages are recorded in the environment via the `Manifest.toml`. The commands below assume that you git cloned all three repos to `{your_projects_directory}`.

    ```julia
    ] # open Julia package manager
    develop ../PowerSystems.jl
    develop ../PowerSimulationsDynamics.jl
    ```
5. Instantiate the environment.

    Install all packages and generate a complete environment based on the provided `Project.toml` and `Manifest.toml`. After this, your environment should match the environment used to generate the manuscript results. Most scripts will correctly load these environment files at runtime. 
    ```julia
    ] instantiate
    ```

## Repository Structure
The file tree below represents the codebase. Groups of files are summarized in parentheses. Comments are not comprehensive.
```
.
├── Project.toml
├── Manifest.toml
├── README.md
├── LICENSE
├── analysis/
│   ├── performance_files_build/
│   │   └── (model construction performance metrics in jld2 format)
│   ├── performance_files_solve/
│   │   └── (time integration performance metrics in jld2 format)
│   ├── performance_plots/
│   │   └── (pdf figures of performance_files_*/ used in manuscript)
│   ├── utils/
│   │   └── helper_functions_analysis.jl
│   ├── validation_files/
│   │   ├── (eig norm metrics in jld2 format)
│   │   ├── (trajectory norm metrics in jld2 format)
│   │   ├── (csv summary of norm metrics used in manuscript)
│   │   └── (pdf figure of example trajectories used in manuscript)
│   ├── calculate_difference_norms.jl
│   ├── measure_performance_build.jl
│   ├── measure_performance_solve.jl
│   ├── plot_performance.jl
│   ├── plot_validation_example.jl
│   └── summarize_validation_metrics.jl
├── mtk/                                    ###  GIR implementation
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── ComponentDefinitions_MTK.jl     # subsystems for GIR models
│   │   ├── helper_functions_MTK.jl
│   │   └── SystemDefinitions_MTK.jl        # topology for GIR models
│   └── run_simulation_MTK.jl
├── raw_files/
│   ├── raw_files_6n/
│   │   └── (6-node models - machine-transformer subsystem)
│   ├── raw_files_9n/
│   │   └── (9-node models used to generate 6-node models)
│   └── build_raw_files_from_9bus_blocks.jl
├── sienna/                                 ### CIR implementation 
│   ├── init_files/
│   │   └── (initial conditions and set points in jld2 format)
│   ├── json_files/
│   │   └── (Sienna models in json format)
│   ├── utils/
│   │   ├── build_json_files.jl             # topology for CIR models
│   │   ├── ComponentDefinitions_Sienna.jl  # subsystems for CIR models
│   │   └── helper_functions_Sienna.jl
│   └── run_simulation_Sienna.jl
└── slurm/
    ├── build*.bat
    ├── mtk*.bat
    └── solve*.bat
```

## Workflow to reproduce everything
Very basic high-level workflow of how to reproduce the experimental results. See `slurm/` for more details about script args and resource configurations. 

1. Build the set of 8 models from WSCC 9-bus.
    - `build_raw_files_from_9bus_blocks.jl`
    - `build_json_files.jl`
2. Run simulations for CIR with Sienna and save trajectories, eigenvalues, initial conditions, and set points.
    - `run_simulation_Sienna.jl`
3. Run simulations for GIR with ModelingToolkit (and the initial conditions/setpoints from Sienna) and save trajectories and eigenvalues.
    - `run_simulation_MTK.jl`
4. Compare the resulting trajectories/eigenvalues and generate validation metrics.
    - `calculate_difference_norms.jl`
5. Plot and summarize the validation metrics (Table II and Figure 6 in the manuscript).
    - `plot_validation_example.jl`
    - `summarize_validation_metrics.jl`
6. Compare the model construction and time integration performance of GIR and CIR in a more controlled environment and generation performance metrics.
    - `measure_performance_build.jl`
    - `measure_performance_solve.jl`
7. Plot the performance metrics (Figures 7,8, and 9 in the manuscript).
    - `plot_performance.jl`

## Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research, Department of Energy Computational Science Graduate Fellowship under Award Number DE-SC0024386.

This work utilized the [Alpine high performance computing resource at the University of Colorado Boulder](https://doi.org/10.25811/k3w6-pk81). Alpine is jointly funded by the University of Colorado Boulder, the University of Colorado Anschutz, Colorado State University, and the National Science Foundation (award 2201538).


## Citation

If you find this manuscript useful, please kindly cite it as:

```bibtex
@article{tbd-in-review,
  title={DAE Index Reduction for Electromagnetic Transient Models},
  author={Fiona Majeau and Jose Daniel Lara and Eduardo Corona and Bri-Mathias Hodge},
  year={2026},
  journal={tbd in review},
  doi={tbd in review}
}
```